Rewriting the rules: Succeeding in the  
new retail banking  

landscape  Authored by: 
Vaibhav Gujral 
Nick Malik 
Zubin Taraporevala  
Global Banking  February 20191Rewriting the rules: Succeeding in the new retail banking landscape 
Retail banks have long competed on distribution, realizing economies of scale through network 

effects and investments in brand and 

infrastructure. But even those scale economies 

had limits above a certain size. As a result, in 

most retail banking markets, a few large 

institutions, operating at similar efficiency ratios, 

dominate market share. Changes to the retail 

banking business model have mostly come in 
response to regulatory shifts, as opposed to a 

purposeful reimagining of what the winning bank 

of the future will look like.  
Retail banks have also not kept pace with the improvements in customer experience seen in 

other consumer industries. Few banks stand out 
for innovation in customer interaction models or 
branch formats. Marketing investments have 
traditionally focused on brand building and increasing loyalty: a reputable brand stood for 
trust and security and became a moat, providing 

protection against new entrants to the sector. 

Finally, most banks offer similar products, with 

limited innovation in features.  
Today, the moats that banks have built are more 
likely to restrict their own progress than protect 

them from attackers. Four shifts are reshaping 

the global retail banking landscape to the point 

where banks need to fundamentally rethink what 

it takes to compete and win. This should be an 
urgent priority for banks. The pace of change will 
likely accelerate, with a select set of large-scale 
winners emerging in the next three to five years 

that will gain share in their core markets and 

begin to compete across borders, leaving many 

sub-scale institutions scrambling for relevance. 
Rewriting the rules: Succeeding in the new retail banking landscape  
2Rewriting the rules: Succeeding in the new retail banking landscape 
Four shifts are reshaping retail 
banking Four secular shifts are changing the way retail 
banks will compete in the coming years:    The traditional distribution-led growth 
formula is losing relevance, with a 
breakdown in the relationship between 

branch footprint and growth.  
  Banks are now competing on customer 
experience, with leaders growing faster than 
their competitors.    Scale economics are back—banks that excel 
at deploying new technologies (e.g., automation and machine learning) and those 

with a more digital-centric channel mix will 

have a structural cost advantage.    The retail banking relationship is getting 
unbundled along product lines, fueled by 
digitization and, increasingly, by regulation—

and the biggest profit pools are under attack. 

A few banks will be able to temper and 
reverse this trend, using superior data and 

analytics capabilities to build deeper and 
broader relationships with their customers.  
In the near term, these shifts will combine to intensify competition as new entrants and 
incumbents seek to push past traditional 
boundaries. More than 100 digital attacker banks 

have launched in the last few years globally—
including N26, Monzo and Revolut in Europe; 

WeBank, Digibank, Jenius in Asia; SoFi, Marcus, 

Moven in the US; Nubank in South America—
while many incumbents have launched or are 

considering launching digital-first models.  Over the next three to five years, we expect a 
few players to emerge from this competitive 

scrum to gain dominant share in their core 

markets and possibly beyond. These firms will 
have taken bold and decisive actions to 
capitalize on the shifts that are reshaping the 
industry. In some cases, these winners will be 
incumbents that build on an already significant 

share; in others, they will be institutions newer to 

the banking industry, which use their agility, 

strategic aggressiveness, and sharp execution to 

attract customers.   1. The traditional distribution-led growth formula 

no longer applies Until the financial crisis in 2007, a retail bank’s 

total share of deposits was tightly linked to the 

size of its branch network. Even as internet use 

grew rapidly, customers still visited branches for 

account servicing and to learn about and 

purchase new products. The physical branch 

created a sense of security and trust. Banks with 

higher branch density benefited from a network 

effect—the more branches, the higher the 

likelihood of acquiring and retaining customers.  
Over the past decade, this relationship between 
deposit growth and branch density has 

weakened. Deposits at the 25 largest US retail 

banks have doubled over the past decade, while 
their combined branch footprint shrank by 15 
percent over the same period. This reverse 

correlation is even sharper for the top five US 

banks—while reducing branches by 15 percent, 

they increased deposits by 2.6 times (
Exhibit 1). While there have been previous periods of 

branch contraction, they were clearly tied to 

economic downturns; this most recent wave of 

retrenchment commenced about a decade ago 

and has persisted through a period of robust 

economic growth.   
Retail banking branch networks are contracting 
across North America, the UK, and Europe 

(Exhibit 2, page 4), although the pace of change varies considerably between regions. Those that 

are ahead of the curve have reduced branches 

by as much as 71 percent (Netherlands). Banks 

in North America and Southern Europe are 
3Rewriting the rules: Succeeding in the new retail banking landscape 
reducing branches and growing digital sales at a 
more gradual rate. In many Asian, African, and 

Latin American countries, branch reduction is not 

so apparent—only because retail banks in these 

markets leapfrogged branch distribution to go 

directly to digital sales.  
The rate of branch reduction is often tied to 
customer willingness to purchase banking 

products online or on mobile devices. Eighty to 
ninety percent of banking customers in the 
Nordics, for example, are open to digital product 

purchases for most financial products, compared 

to 50 to 60 percent in North America and 

Southern Europe (
Exhibit 3, page 5). While customer willingness to purchase products via 

digital channels varies, however, the common 

thread is that in all markets this readiness is far 

ahead of actual digital sales and will require banks 

to catch up to consumer needs and expectations.   0060206.0
402.0
4.0100916
0820040506072017
1112131415
100916
0820040506072017
1112131415
Peak
branches
-15%
Peak
branches
-15%
4000.40200.2
0.60.8
1.0
Exhibit 1
Top 25 
US banks
Top 5 
US banks
Branches
Thousands
Branches
Thousands
Deposits
1$ trillion
Deposits
$ trillion
210% 
increase in 

deposits
 since 2008
257% 
increase in 

deposits
 since 2008
15% decline 
in branches
 since 2008 

peak15% decline 
in branches
 since 2008 

peakDepositsBranches1 Deposits r
epresent transaction deposits only.
Source: SNL; McKinsey analysis
The correlation between branch scale and deposit growth has 
weakened for US retail banks. 
4Rewriting the rules: Succeeding in the new retail banking landscape 
Within any specific market, of course, there are 
banks that have acted swiftly to adopt digital and 
remote as their main channel for interactions, and 

those that have lagged behind (Exhibit 4, page 6). One UK bank makes more than 50 percent of sales 

through digital channels, well ahead of market peers. 

Even in the historically branch-dependent small 
business segment, a range of banks and fintechs are 

finding that remote value propositions delivered 

digitally (e.g., remote relationship managers at Nordic 

banks) are attractive to small businesses. 
Banks that are ahead of the curve in terms of 
capitalizing on this shift are pulling away from the 

pack and have taken decisive actions on several 
fronts:  
  Set a bold aspiration for sales/service channel 
mix. Banks must do more than react to shifts 
in consumer preferences—they need to set 

aspirational targets for sales and service 
across channels. Some customers will self-

select into digital channels, but banks can do 2016
0210
082000
400
04500
700
0612
800
9001,000
14600
200
0100
300
UKCanada
Finland
Portugal
SpainGermany
Netherlands
Italy
Sweden
DenmarkGreece
USBank branches 
per million people
1Branches 

per million 

people2Peak-to-

trough 

reduction
 625
Spain38%
 494Portugal27%
 486
Italy16%
 358Germany37%
 306
US17%
161
Canada11%
 213
Greece42%
 196
Denmark56%
 192
Finland45%
 183
Sweden22%
 153
UK37%
Netherlands 9971%
Exhibit 2
1 Represents bank branch density per million people in the country.
2 Based on 2016 or latest year available.
Source: McKinsey World Banking Intelligence database; McKinsey analysis
The number of branches per million people is declining in North 
America, the UK, and Europe.
5Rewriting the rules: Succeeding in the new retail banking landscape 
more to encourage less motivated customers 
to make the shift. Banks in markets like the 
Nordics and UK have reduced the number of 

customers using branches by up to 60 
percent by focusing on how to serve the 

heaviest branch users effectively through 

other channels.    Use advanced analytics to reshape the physical footprint. Optimizing the branch network requires a deep understanding of consumer 
preferences in every micro-market, and of the 
economics of making changes at the branch 
level. Leading institutions are using 

combinatorial optimization algorithms to 
optimize the net present value (NPV) of the 

network based on granular customer data on 
characteristics such as digital propensity, 

willingness to travel, needs based on 
transaction patterns and branch usage, and the 

size and space/format of branches. A European 

bank recently used this 
approach to 
identify 25 Willingness to purchase a digital product
1Percent of customers 
Purchases of products digitally
2Percent of customers
49565656606165718386UKEastern Europe
Canada
Italy
USSpainGermany
France

Sweden
Netherlands
12131311192414143237Exhibit 3
1 Represents customers that would be interested in purchasing their core banking product (e.g., checking account) digitally — vi
a internet, tablet or mobile. 
2 Percentage of customers that acquired their core banking product (e.g., checking account) digitally—from among customers that 
acquired a new product in the last 2 years.
Source: McKinsey Consumer Multichannel Survey (n=12,000)
Northern European banking customers lead the way in terms digital 
preferences.
6Rewriting the rules: Succeeding in the new retail banking landscape 
percent of branches that could be closed, and 
35 percent of FTEs that could be redeployed.   
  Develop cutting-edge digital sales capabilities. Achieving meaningfully higher levels of digital sales requires a sophisticated approach to 

digital marketing and an understanding of how 
to optimize each stage of the funnel. Most 
consumers already seek information on 

financial products on digital channels (e.g., 

bank websites, price comparison sites), but few institutions are highly effective at 
converting these inquiries into digital sales. 
Leading banks use first- and third-party data 

(e.g., geospatial, browsing behavior), a robust 

marketing technology stack (360-degree view 

of customer, omnichannel campaigns), and an 

agile operating model (e.g., cross-functional 

marketing war rooms). With these elements in 

place, progress can be rapid; a North 

American institution tripled annual online 
product sales in 12 months.  
Nordics
Latin America
Poland
Average
Digital customer activity
June 2018
Digital sales penetration
July 2017 – June 2018
Market
highest
1observed
Market
lowest
1observed
Activity
2: 57pp
Sales3: 48ppSingapore
Activity
2: 31pp
Sales3: 47pp
United Kingdom
Activity
2: 22pp
Sales3: 45ppUnited States
Activity
2: 37pp
Sales3: 41pp
Australia/
New Zealand
Activity
2: 25pp
Sales3: 30pp
Italy
Exhibit 4
Note: For Latin America, Italy, and the Nordics, only average shown.
1 Lowest/highest observed for each metric in given market - not necessarily the same bank
2 Activity = difference between highest and lowest observed digital customer activity
3 Sales = difference between highest and lowest observed digital sales penetration
Source: McKinsey
In most markets, there are wide gaps between banks in terms of 
digital performance.
7Rewriting the rules: Succeeding in the new retail banking landscape 
2. Customer experience is beginning to gener-
ate meaningful separation in growth  
Across all retail businesses—including banks—

customers now expect interactions to be simple, 
intuitive, and seamlessly connected across physical 

and digital touchpoints.  Banks are investing in meeting these expectations 
but have struggled to keep pace—focusing on the 
less-than-lofty goal of making the experience “less 
bad” for customers, rather than “outstanding.” 
Many banks are hampered by legacy IT 

infrastructures and siloed data. As a result, few 

banks are true leaders in terms of customer 

experience. Even for leading institutions, typically 
only one-half to two-thirds of customers rate their 

experience as excellent. This holds true across 

product categories, including those such as cards 

and deposits that have higher digital adoption rates.  The impact of this less-than-stellar performance is measurable. For example, McKinsey analysis 
shows that in the US, top-quartile banks in terms 
of experience have had meaningfully higher 
deposit growth over the past three years (
Exhibit 5, page 8). Simply being good does not move the 
needle; customer impact really shows when banks 

offer outstanding experiences. The few 

“experience leaders” emerging in retail banking are 

generating higher growth than their peers by 

attracting new customers and deepening 
relationships with their existing customer base. 

Highly satisfied customers are two-and-a-half 

times more likely to open new accounts/products 

with their existing bank than those who are merely 

satisfied; they are also less price sensitive and 

generate positive word of mouth.   
These experience leaders are adopting tactics 
pioneered by digital-native companies in other 

sectors such as ecommerce, travel, and 
entertainment: setting a “north star” based on proven markers of differentiated experience (e.g., 

UX design, carrying context across channels), 

redesigning journeys that matter most for digital-

first customers and not just digital-only 
customers, and establishing integrated real-time 

measurement that cuts across products, 

channels, and employees. These banks know that 
customer experience is not just about the front-

end look and feel, but that it requires discipline, 

focus, and investment in the following actions:    Focus on the journeys and sub-journeys that matter: The relative contribution of sub-
journeys (e.g., 
app downloading; activating account) in determining overall customer experience varies considerably. In fact, ten to 

fifteen sub-journeys have the biggest 

customer satisfaction impact for most 
products and should thus be the first priority. 

For instance, when opening a new deposit 
account, the researching options sub-journey 
has eight times the impact on customer 
satisfaction than other account-opening sub-
journeys, on average (
Exhibit 6, page 9). For banks, the key is to prioritize these high-
impact sub-journeys and systematically 

redesign them from scratch—a process that 

can take about three to four months and 

result in at least a 15 to 20 percent lift in 

customer satisfaction.   Change the way you engage with customers. Experience leaders understand that digitization is not just about creating a cutting-edge online 

and mobile experience, and that satisfaction is 
shaped by customer experience across 

channels.1 The experience should be seamless, especially on journeys that are more 

likely to take place over multiple channels, 
such as new account opening, financial 1  Walter Rizzi and Zubin Taraporevala, “The balancing act: Omnichannel excellence in retail banking,” McKinsey.com, January 2019.
8Rewriting the rules: Succeeding in the new retail banking landscape 
advice, or issue resolution. One wealth manager equipped its front-line relationship 

managers with robo-advice algorithms that are 

in sync with what customers see on the self-
directed channel—and provided the RMs with 

daily and weekly next-best-action 
recommendations to nudge their clients. 

Banks need to deploy these tools broadly and 

empower their front-line staff to play a more 

consultative role that blends human and digital 

recommendations. They will also need to 

revisit how these employees are incentivized, 

shifting to a longer-term view of relationships 

and profitability rather than just product sales. 
  Translate data into personalized products 
and real-time offers. The amount of data available on individual customers or 
prospects has exploded in recent years. The 

challenge is to convert this data into 
actionable nudges and highly relevant offers 

for customers that are delivered at the right 

moment. Credit card companies have long 

offered discounts on specific spending 

categories or with specific retailers. Today, 

however, they can improve loyalty and share 

of spending by providing location-specific 

offers right when a customer enters a coffee 

shop, movie theater, or car dealership. South 
Real differences in customer satisfaction
1CSAT (Percent of customers rating 9 or 10) 
 Leaders in customer experience are 
growing faster 
Deposit CAGR (2014-17)
65554939-26
5.93.2
46%
Top
quartile
CSAT
Bottom
quartile
CSAT
Bottom
quartile
3rdquartile
2nd
quartile
Top
quartile
Exhibit 5
1 Percentage of respondents that selected a 9 or 10 on a 10-point customer satisfaction scale. Question: “We would like to 
understand your experience with [product] with [Bank]. Overall, how satised or dissatised are you with [product] with [Bank]?
”Source: McKinsey 2018 Retail Banking Customer Experience Benchmark Survey. 
US retail banks with better customer experience are growing deposits 
faster.
9Rewriting the rules: Succeeding in the new retail banking landscape 
Africa’s Discovery, as an example, is 
launching a bank with product features that 

are informed by behavioral science and 

incentive design research (e.g., dynamic 

interest rates for savings and credit products 

that are tied to healthy financial behavior).  
3. Productivity gains and returns to scale  

are back  
Larger retail banks have historically tended to be 

more efficient than their smaller competitors, 

benefiting from distribution network effects and 

the shared overhead for IT, infrastructure, and 

other shared services. Our analysis of over 3,000 
515
01020253040
3545
5050055606570Importance 
Relative importance %
3Researching options
Deposit sub-journeys
1Downloading the app
Activating the account
Learning about account features
Completing the application 
Performance
Journey SAT (top 2 boxes)
2Exhibit 6 
1 Deposit example journeys shown; trend also holds true for credit card and mortgage account-opening sub-journeys.
2 Customer satisfaction with individual sub-journeys. Represents percentage of customers that rated the sub-journey 9 or 10 (on 
10-point scale).
3 Relative importance is the amount that any individual sub-journey impacts the total journey score; calculated using a variance
 decomposition approach.
Source: McKinsey 2018 North American Retail Banking Journey Benchmarks
Banks should prioritize the sub-journeys the have the most impact on 
customer experience.
10Rewriting the rules: Succeeding in the new retail banking landscape 
banks around the globe shows that while there is 
variation across countries, larger institutions tend 

to be more efficient both in terms of cost-to-asset 

(Exhibit 7) and cost-to-income ratios. However, 
beyond a certain point, even larger institutions 
struggle to eke out efficiencies or realize benefits 

from scale. For example, even after several years 

of cost-cutting after the most recent financial 

crisis, large US retail banks have not made 

material improvements in productivity over the 

past decade (Exhibit 8).   We expect this paradigm to change over the next 
few years, as structural improvements in efficiency 

ratios and increasing returns to scale enable some 

large banks to become even more efficient. The 

reason is two-fold: first, advances in technologies 

such as robotic process automation, machine 

learning, and cognitive artificial intelligence—many 

of which are now mainstream and commercially 

viable—are unleashing a new wave of productivity 

improvements for financial institutions. Deployed 

effectively, these tools can reduce costs by as 
Country examples
32015-17 C/A, bps
Lowest quintile
 Quintile 3
Quintile 2
Quintile 4
Top quintile
Top 3 banks 
349296
277
320307306
-15%
11499
113948786
-24%
184121111959295
-49%
390316247150219184
-53%
ChinaIndiaJapan
US-1-3-6-5
0-4-20
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Average cost to assets
2015-2017 C/A, bps
LowHigh
Market share
Log (Market share)
225%
5%1%Exhibit 7
Linear regression
1Y = 50bps - 50x
R2 = 8.2%

P-value: 2x10
-16
  1 Linear regression based on sample of ~3000 banks (all countries included with a sample size larger than 30).
2 Market share dened as bank’s asset size divided by total assets of banks from the specic country. 
3 Quintiles based on market share. 
Source: S&P Global Market Intelligence; McKinsey Panorama
The efÞciency advantage for large retail banks holds true on a global 
level.
11Rewriting the rules: Succeeding in the new retail banking landscape 
much as 30 to 40 percent in customer-facing, 
middle-, and back-office activities, and 

fundamentally change how work is done. 
Dramatic change has already taken place in 

banking sectors such as capital markets, where 

algorithmic trading and automation are radically 

changing the talent profile and making a 

significant portion of existing jobs redundant.  
The second factor leading to a wave of productivity improvement in retail banking is the 

shift from physical to digital channels for 
customer acquisition. Banks with scale—and skills in leveraging that advantage—will achieve 
customer acquisition costs of up to two to three 

times lower than their smaller peers. Their 
outsized volumes of customer data will lead to 
better targeting and funnel conversion. As 
investments are shifted toward digital channels, 

the productivity gap between large and small 

banks will widen (Exhibit 9).  This dynamic has played out in more digitally 
mature industries, with firms like Amazon and 
Exhibit 8
1 Top 25 US banks by deposits in transaction accounts.
Source: SNL; McKinsey analysis
705512092000
754016450650156065138002010307
0414
05082017
1011Cost/income ratio
%Evolution of cost/income ratio for leading banks
1Lower
quartile
Median
Upper
quartile
Most large US retail banks have struggled to improve productivity 
beyond a narrow efÞciency band.
12Rewriting the rules: Succeeding in the new retail banking landscape 
Priceline acquiring customers at a significantly lower cost than competitors. As in these 
industries, eventually a limited number of dominant 
banks will emerge, squeezing out undifferentiated 

mid-sized and smaller banks. There are early signs 

of this trend: undifferentiated smaller community 

banks in the US have lost a significant share of 

deposits over the last two to three years, while the 

three largest banks have gained share. Of course, 

scale is not everything. Banks that succeed in this 
new wave of productivity will also have taken the 

following actions:    Use cutting-edge technology to automate: Over the next few years, banks will increase their use 
of technologies such as natural language 
processing and artificial intelligence to automate 

customer-facing interactions and complex 

internal tasks. Already, legal and compliance 

departments are automating the extraction of 

data from documents and using algorithms to 

triage suspicious patterns for manual review. 

One leading global institution recently revamped 

its customer-care process with a raft of new 

technologies to identify potential FTE reductions 
Cost/income ratio
%101001,000
25-30%
50-55%
70-75%
Bank size 

$ billion assets
Current cost curve
Future cost curve
100%
Exhibit 9
Greater returns to scale,
 driven by ability to leverage 
investments in customer analytics and experience 

without needing to scale the physical presence
Structurally lower cost across the curve
, driven by adoption of technologies like 

machine learning, artielligence, 

robotic process automation
Lower cost of starting up
, driven by 
open banking architecture (e.g., 

API-enabled “bank in a box”) and 

cloud hosting
 Source: SNL; S&P Market Intelligence; McKinsey analysis
Over the next 5 years, we expect the industry cost curve to shift 
fundamentally downward, with greater returns to scale for larger 

institutions.
13Rewriting the rules: Succeeding in the new retail banking landscape 
of more than 30 percent, and a North American 
bank used automation technologies to identify 
efficiency improvements of 20 percent in its 

finance function.   
  Build and reinforce the brand: With rising 
digital sales consumers have more choice 
than ever in selecting a financial services 
provider. However, our research shows that 

across most categories consumers actively 

consider only two to three products before 

deciding on a purchase. So it remains as 

important as ever for a bank to be part of the 
initial consideration set. Brands with superior 
awareness and recognition are not only more 

likely to be part of the initial consideration set 
but also achieve higher conversion rates than 
lesser-known brands when they are 

considered. A leading credit card provider in a 

major European market that invested heavily 

in brand awareness is now twice as likely to 

be actively considered—by 17 percent of 

consumers versus 7 to 10 percent for other 

brands—and experiences 50 percent higher 

conversion when considered compared to 

lesser-known brands.
2 The returns enjoyed by 
banks with superior recognition—in the form 

of lower acquisition costs—reinforce the 

benefits of scale and will be an advantage 
over time for larger institutions that can invest 
heavily in building and reinforcing their brand.  
4. The unbundling and “rebundling” of  

retail banking  
The tight one-on-one retail banking relationships 

of old are unbundling. Forty percent of US 

households today hold a deposit account with 
more than one institution. It is common to have a 

mortgage with one bank, an unsecured loan with 
a different lender, and separate deposit and 
investment accounts. The banking relationship is 

fragmenting even faster in countries with higher 
digital adoption, such as the Netherlands and the 
UK, where the percentage of customers that use 

more than two providers has increased by 20 

percent over the past five years.  
This decline of customer loyalty provides a 
perfect context for firms seeking to enter banking 
in a selective way—focusing on the most 
profitable segments. Some attackers have 

demonstrated that despite incumbent banks’ 
access to much more customer data, they can 

compete effectively on customer experience 

coupled with aggressive pricing to gain share. 

New entrants in financial services typically begin 
by focusing on a niche—making either a product 

or segment-focused play. For example, 

Wealthfront and Personal Capital in the US began 

with a sharp focus on mass affluent customers—

providing robo advice aligned with financial goals 

at far less cost than traditional financial advisors. 
SoFi focused first on recent graduates from elite 

colleges, using student loan refi as a hook 

product. Their ambition, however, is to own the 

full banking relationship of this segment over 

time—providing cards, mortgage products, and 

broader banking services—although it remains to 

be seen how feasible this will prove in practice. 
The Open Banking movement, heralded by Europe’s second Payments Service Directive and 

the UK’s Open Banking Standards, has the 

potential to accelerate the unbundling of banking 
in the regions where it applies, leading to 

increasingly intense competition over the next few 

years.3 The requirement for banks to share data 
and provide access to consumer and small 
2  January 2018 McKinsey research on 8,000 UK credit card applicants. 
3Alessio Botta, Nunzio Digiacomo, Reinhard Höll, and Liz Oakes, “PSD2: Taking advantage of open-banking disruption,”  
14Rewriting the rules: Succeeding in the new retail banking landscape 
business accounts through a common framework 
of APIs is likely to fuel a wave of innovation and 
level the playing field for fintechs and technology 
providers seeking entry through payments or 

consumer financing. Recent McKinsey research 

shows that consumers are most interested in 

marketplace concepts that simplify comparisons 
and make it easier to switch between providers 

based on their needs and preferences.   
The trend toward unbundling in financial services is 
well under way, but where it will lead is still an open 

question. In industries such as music, television, 
ecommerce, and transportation, digital distribution 

led to unbundling that destroyed value for 

incumbents in the short term; over time, consumers 
tend to converge on a single provider—often an 

attacker. In this context, firms that effectively 

orchestrate platform or ecosystem environments 

tend to eventually emerge as winners.  The history of the music industry over the last 20 years provides a possible model for how things 

will go in banking (Exhibit 10). Until the 1990s, music distribution was dominated by stores 

selling tracks that record companies “bundled” 

onto albums. In the early 2000s, digital 
distribution, especially via iTunes, radically 

reduced distribution costs. Consumers could now 

“unbundle” albums by purchasing individual 

tracks online; not surprisingly, many record stores 

went out of business. Over the past few years, 
however, we have seen a “rebundling” in the form 

of the streaming playlist. Streaming services are 

now the dominant distribution channel, with a few 
large players such as Spotify and Apple emerging 
as winners. The success of these platforms is 
based on their ability to create highly 

personalized bundles based on consumer needs 
and preferences, and a superior interface without 

the friction of purchasing tracks individually. 

Leaders have created significant value for 

consumers by using customer data and insights to deliver a superior experience, rather than by manufacturing the underlying product. 
If we apply this scenario to banking, winning firms will be those that leverage superior access to 
customer data to provide truly differentiated and 

cutting-edge experiences—potentially extending 
beyond financial products and services. To do 

this effectively, banks will need to retain privileged 

access to information about consumers’ sources 

and use of funds, especially through payments 

and transaction activity. Banks that rebundle 

effectively will use this data to deliver compelling 

and integrated experiences that provide seamless 

funding, investment, payments, and money 
movement capabilities. The bottom line is that in 
order to reverse the unbundling of financial 

services, banks need to make it worthwhile for 
consumers to have a relationship with one 

institution; they need to deliver not only simplicity 
and convenience, but also superior value. Only a 
few banks in each market are likely to be able to 

succeed with this strategy.  
Already, large technology firms such as Amazon 
are extending into parts of the financial services 

value chain, starting with areas where they have a 

data advantage such as payments, short-term 
financing for purchases, and working capital 

loans for merchants on their platform. To counter 

the unbundling of their most profitable products, 

banks need to develop capabilities that few 
currently possess, and follow the lead of 

successful technology platforms:    Retain superior access to data on transactions and financial behavior: As vast amounts of data are captured by tech firms on 

consumers’ behavior and preferences, one of 

the last bastions of valuable information is 
data on transactions and financial behavior. To 

retain unparalleled access to this data, banks 

will need to continue to own the transaction 15Rewriting the rules: Succeeding in the new retail banking landscape 
layer, giving them a full view of inbound and 
outbound activity, to form a complete picture 

of consumer balance sheets. Historically, this 

required a bank to be a customer’s primary 

checking account provider; over time, we 

expect that institutions could do this without 
necessarily owning the checking account 
relationship. In some cases, payments or 

transaction providers could see a significant 

share of customers’ spend volume. Financial 

aggregators that sit on top of a suite of 

products and services that are manufactured 
by others may also be in a position to capture 
a broad spectrum of customer activity and 

use it to build an analytics advantage.    Leverage insights to develop innovative products and features: The traditional suite of products that financial institutions offer has 

remained largely unchanged over the past few 

decades—e.g., checking accounts, lending, 
cards/payments, wealth management—and is 

often structurally hard to change given how 

banks are organized. More nimble firms will be 
Market
concentration
Industry

maturity
1990s2000s2010s
Exhibit 10
Streaming services 

emerge, focusing on 

customer experience 

and using analytics to 
“rebundle” tracks into 
playlists that are 

tailored to individuals
Fully unbundled music 
delivery, characterized 

by individuals 

purchasing individual 

tracks through digital 

channels and burning 

bespoke CDs
Music delivered as 
“albums,” pre-bundled 
by a small number of 

record labels onto CDs
 Source: McKinsey analysis
The unbundling and rebundling in the music industry may provide a 
possible model for retail banking distribution.
16Rewriting the rules: Succeeding in the new retail banking landscape 
able to leverage insights to create unique 
offerings—for example, cash in a checking 

account could automatically be optimized for 
return based on financial behaviors and spend 

patterns without needing to ring-fence and 

transfer it to a separate high-yield deposit or 
brokerage account. Or, when a customer 

takes a short-term unsecured loan the rate 

might be optimized based on the steadiness 
of their income stream and savings 

accumulated each month, and they could 
collateralize against balances in other 
accounts with the bank.   Extend beyond purely financial services and 
products over time: There are a couple of 
clear benefits that financial institutions are 

likely to have relative to ecosystems being 

created by large tech firms. Superior access 

to financial information enables them to create 

faster and more precise offers for big-ticket 

products that have financing needs associated 

with them (e.g., homes or cars). For these 
types of products, banks could be well-

positioned to own the full customer journey, 
including the browsing experience and the 
transaction. One Northern European bank has 

developed a mobile app that integrates house 
searches, booking viewings, budgeting, 

transactions, and help with setting up a new 
home (e.g., utilities, appliances, and 
renovation).
4 In the US, Capital One’s Auto 
Navigator facilitates a seamless search 

experience for car buyers and can provide 

instant approval for financing before they visit 

a dealership. 4  Miklós Dietz, Reka Hamvai, Paul Jenkins, Miklos Radnai, and Michael Yee, “Deep insights, broad solutions: How banks can win in 
the vast housing ecosystem,” McKinsey.com, June 2018.
17Rewriting the rules: Succeeding in the new retail banking landscape 
The path forward
In the near term, competition in retail banking is 
likely to intensify, with only a few banks emerg-

ing as winners. These banks will take bold steps 
now to establish a formidable position that fends 
off new entrants and smaller attackers. Retail 

banking leaders should consider and debate the 
following questions as they face the challenges 
of the coming years:  1.What is our strategy to increase customer 
growth over the next three to five years, not 

just protect existing share of wallet?  
2.How bold can we be with our distribution 
plan, and will it be effective two to three years 

from now?  
3.Are we on track to deliver a superior customer 
experience in the next 12 months? What ca-
pabilities will differentiate us from the compe-

tition?  4.How can we deploy new technologies to re-
duce our cost structure? Are we building the 
infrastructure to capture and harness data so 
we can benefit from scale?  
5.Do we need to reposition or reinforce our 
brand, or develop new attacker brands, to tap 
into new customer segments?  6.Are we prepared for the impact of Open Bank-
ing and similar rules that pave the way for at-
tackers and fintechs? What offensive and 

defensive moves do we need to make?  7.How do we position ourselves to rebundle 
products and services around customer 

needs? How should we design our platform 
and what partnerships should we pursue?   Our view is that retail banking is at an inflection 
point, and that the pace of change will accelerate 
significantly over the next three to five years. Suc-

cess will require clarity in direction, and speed 

and agility in execution. Retail banks that capital-
ize on current shifts in the market will emerge 

with a winning position in their core markets and 

begin to compete across borders.  
Vaibhav Gujral is a partner and Nick Malik is a senior partner, both in McKinsey’s New York office. 
Zubin Taraporevala is a senior partner in the London office. 
 
The authors would like to thank Ashwin Adarkar, Jacob Dahl, Filippo Delzi, Miklos Dietz, Dave Elzinga, 

Darius Imregun, Somesh Khanna, Marc Levesque, Alejandro Martinez, and Robert Schiff for their 
contributions to this article. Global Banking Practice  February 2019 
Copyright © McKinsey & Company  
www.mckinsey.com/industries/financial-services/our-insights
